---
title: "Trans-ancestral dissection of urate- and gout-associated major loci SLC2A9 and ABCG2 reveals primate-specific regulatory effects"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-08-10-takei2021
excerpt: ''
date: 2020-08-10
venue: 'Journal of Human Genetics'
paperurl: 'https://www.nature.com/articles/s10038-020-0821-z'
citation: 'Riku Takei, Murray Cadzow, David Markie, Matt Bixley, Amanda Phipps-Green, Tanya J. Major, Changgui Li, Hyon K. Choi, Zhiqiang Li, Hua Hu, Eurogout Consortium, Hui Guo, Meian He, Yongyong Shi, Lisa K. Stamp, Nicola Dalbeth, Tony R. Merriman & Wen-Hua Wei (2021). &quot;Trans-ancestral dissection of urate- and gout-associated major loci SLC2A9 and ABCG2 reveals primate-specific regulatory effects.&quot; <i>Journal of Human Genetics</i>. 66, pp161–1691.'
---

# Abstract

Gout is a complex inflammatory arthritis affecting ~20% of people with an elevated serum urate level (hyperuricemia). Gout and hyperuricemia are essentially specific to humans and other higher primates, with varied prevalence across ancestral groups. <i>SLC2A9</i> and <i>ABCG2</i> are major loci associated with both urate and gout in multiple ancestral groups. However, fine mapping has been challenging due to extensive linkage disequilibrium underlying the associated regions. We used trans-ancestral fine mapping integrated with primate-specific genomic information to address this challenge. Trans-ancestral meta-analyses of GWAS cohorts of either European (EUR) or East Asian (EAS) ancestry resulted in single-variant resolution mappings for <i>SLC2A9</i> (rs3775948 for urate and rs4697701 for gout) and <i>ABCG2</i> (rs2622621 for gout). Tests of colocalization of variants in both urate and gout suggested existence of a shared candidate causal variant for <i>SLC2A9</i> only in EUR and for <i>ABCG2</i> only in EAS. The fine-mapped gout variant rs4697701 was within an ancient enhancer, whereas rs2622621 was within a primate-specific transposable element, both supported by functional evidence from the Roadmap Epigenomics project in human primary tissues relevant to urate and gout. Additional primate-specific elements were found near both loci and those adjacent to <i>SLC2A9</i> overlapped with known statistical epistatic interactions associated with urate as well as multiple super-enhancers identified in urate-relevant tissues. We conclude that by leveraging ancestral differences trans-ancestral fine mapping has identified ancestral and functional variants for <i>SLC2A9</i> or <i>ABCG2</i> with primate-specific regulatory effects on urate and gout.

[Download paper here](https://www.nature.com/articles/s10038-020-0821-z)

Recommended citation: Riku Takei, Murray Cadzow, David Markie, Matt Bixley, Amanda Phipps-Green, Tanya J. Major, Changgui Li, Hyon K. Choi, Zhiqiang Li, Hua Hu, Eurogout Consortium, Hui Guo, Meian He, Yongyong Shi, Lisa K. Stamp, Nicola Dalbeth, Tony R. Merriman & Wen-Hua Wei (2021). &quot;Trans-ancestral dissection of urate- and gout-associated major loci SLC2A9 and ABCG2 reveals primate-specific regulatory effects.&quot; <i>Journal of Human Genetics</i>. 66, pp161–1691.
